Chapter 5
Conflict Styles

To Get You Thinking About Conflict Styles …
I guess my boss is mad at me. I have left her three texts and she hasn’t returned them. I wonder why she is avoiding me.
My boyfriend is really something. Every time I ask him to change something, even small things like what time we’ll go out, he explodes.
John is a good manager. He can sit and listen to our problems without being defensive or jumping in to argue. He somehow gets us all to work out our problems.
I handle conflicts with my wife by not talking to her. If I tell her she is doing something I don’t like, she pouts for 2 days. It’s just better to avoid the whole thing.
Kevin and Susana are quite a pair! They fight all the time and don’t seem to get anywhere, except ready for the next round of fighting.
 The Nature of Styles

Conflict styles are patterned responses, or clusters of behavior, that people use in conflict. Style preferences develop over a person’s lifetime based on a complicated blend of personal characteristics, life experiences, and family background (Hamilton and Tafoya 2012; Roloff 2009; Siffert and Schwarz 2011). By the time you are an adult, your basic orientation to conflicts in particular contexts has developed. Your preferences for either harmony and calm, or high-energy engagement, remain fairly consistent, depending on context. For instance, with your siblings, you may engage in spirited conversation over the dinner table, or you might avoid any direct talk about difficult issues with them. In most relationships, we develop repetitive conflict styles.
Developing a repertoire of diverse styles may stretch you out of your comfort zone. However, having a choice of styles will enhance your chances for productive conflict. This chapter will introduce you to a variety of styles and their impact on relationships.
While you were born with various personality orientations, such as introversion and extraversion, a preference for particular conflict styles develops based on your learning and experience. You can change your style for a particular conflict once you become familiar with different approaches. You may continue to prefer a certain style, but you also can make choices. Are you mindful of the style(s) you use when engaging in conflict? How might your success and overall wellness in conflict situations improve if you were?
Page 151
We use the Rahim (2011) classification of five conflict styles throughout this chapter. The five styles are presented in Figure 5.1.1

Figure 5.1 Conflict Styles
The Rahim model can be called the dual concern model, meaning concern for self and concern for other. Notice that avoiding represents low concern for the self and low concern for the other. Obliging, commonly called accommodation, represents a low level of concern for yourself but a high level of concern for others (you give them what they want). The opposite of obliging is dominating—you are highly concerned for yourself but have only a low level of concern for the other (you “go for it” regardless of the desires of the other). Dominating was formerly termed competing. Integrating includes both your concerns and the other’s concerns. Compromising is a middle ground, where moderate degrees of concern both for yourself and the other show in the resolution of conflict. As you will discover, communication nuances provide a complex understanding of conflict styles. Styles look differently and impact others differently depending on how they are communicated (Guerrero and Gross 2014).
 Assessing Your Styles

Before we get much further in to the chapter, complete this assessment on conflict styles. This assessment is adapted from Rahim and Magner (1995) and will give you scores on each of the five styles of avoiding, obliging, dominating, integrating, and compromising.
Page 152
You will come to learn later in the chapter that conflict styles often depend on different contexts and relationships (Speakman and Ryals 2010). Therefore, fill out the style assessment for two different situations, A and B. For situation A, describe a personal relationship—with a friend, romantic partner, or close family member. Then, for situation B, pick a less personal relationship—someone you are doing a class or work project with, someone you don’t know well at work, or some other less personal close relation. The key is to pick specific people for situation A and situation B. Do not fill out the scales “in general.”
To amplify your perspective on styles, ask two different people, one whom you know in a family or intimate relationship, and one person who knows you well from a group or work environment. Choose people with whom you are not in a current conflict, and whom you trust. Tell them that they will help you with your conflict class project, and that any way they describe you will be helpful. Give them time to do this thoughtfully. Ask your two friends to fill out Application 5.1 with your name, rather than person A and person B. Overall, exploring your conflict styles in these ways will help you develop a more circumspect, or “rounded,” understanding of how you orient to and perform in conflict.
Page 153
Application 5.1

Assessing Your Conflict Style

styles

Think of two different contexts (A and B) where you have/have experienced a conflict, disagreement, argument, or disappointment with someone. An example might be someone you live with and a work or group associate. Then, according to the following scale, fill in your scores for situation A and situation B. For each question, you will have two scores. For example, on question 1 the scoring might look like this: 1.2 | 4
Write the name of each person for the two contexts here:
Person A _______________ Person B _______________
1 = never  2 = seldom  3 = sometimes  4 = often  5 = always
Person A | Person B
_____|_____ I avoid being “put on the spot”; I keep conflicts to myself.
_____|_____ I use my influence to get my ideas accepted.
_____|_____ I usually try to “split the difference” in order to resolve an issue.
_____|_____ I generally try to satisfy the other’s needs.
_____|_____ I try to investigate an issue to find a solution acceptable to us.
_____|_____ I usually avoid open discussion of my differences with the other.
_____|_____ I use my authority to make a decision in my favor.
_____|_____ I try to find a middle course to resolve an impasse.
_____|_____ I usually accommodate the other’s wishes.
_____|_____ I try to integrate my ideas with the other’s to come up with a decision jointly.
_____|_____ I try to stay away from disagreement with the other.
_____|_____ I use my expertise to make a decision that favors me.
_____|_____ I propose a middle ground for breaking deadlocks.
_____|_____ I give in to the other’s wishes.
_____|_____ I try to work with the other to find solutions that satisfy both our expectations.
_____|_____ I try to keep my disagreements to myself in order to avoid hard feelings.
_____|_____ I generally pursue my side of an issue.
_____|_____ I negotiate with the other to reach a compromise.
_____|_____ I often go with the other’s suggestions.
_____|_____ I exchange accurate information with the other so we can solve a problem together.
_____|_____ I try to avoid unpleasant exchanges with the other.
_____|_____ I sometimes use my power to win.
_____|_____ I use “give and take” so that a compromise can be made.
_____|_____ I try to satisfy the other’s expectations.
_____|_____ I try to bring all our concerns out in the open so that the issues can be resolved.
Scoring: Add up your scores on the following questions:
A | B		A | B		A | B		A | B		A | B

1. ___|___		2. ____|____		3. ____|____		4. ____|____		5. ____|____
6. __|__		7. ____|____		8. ____|____		9. ____|____		10. ____|____
11. __|___		12. ___|___		13. ___|____		14. ____|____		15. ____|____
16. _|_		17. ___|___		18. ___|___		19. ____|____		20. ___|___
21. __|___		22. ___|___		23. ____|____		24. ____|____		25. ___|____
___|___		_____|_____		_____|_____		_____|_____		_____|_____
A | B		A | B		A | B		A | B		A | B
Avoiding Totals		Dominating (competing) Totals		Compromising Totals		Obliging (accommodating) Totals		Integrating (collaborating) Totals
Source: Adapted from M. A. Rahim and N. R. Magner (1995), “Confirmatory Factor Analysis of the Styles of Handling Interpersonal Conflict: First-Order Factor Model and Its Invariance across Groups,” Journal of Applied Psychology 80, no. 1, 122–132.
Now that you have self-assessments for the five styles, across two different contexts, and information from two others, you have four scores with which you can begin to assess how your styles can be described. You may have different styles across the contexts (slightly more than 50% of people do), or you may be consistent across the relationships.
Page 154
Before we examine the five styles in depth, let us explore our most fundamental orientation to conflict—avoidance or engagement.
Application 5.2

Styles in Your Group

Compare your scores on the styles measure for situation A and situation B, and your scores from your two friends. In small groups, address these questions:
How many people of your group have relatively consistent styles in different contexts?
For those who have different answers, answer this question: “What is it about the two situations that prompts me to use different styles?”
As a group, discuss the advantages of using the same style across two different situations.
What are the advantages of using different styles across the two situations?
Do personal situations and less personal situations call for different styles?
How do you respond to the scores provided by your two friends? What can you learn from their responses?
 Will You Avoid or Engage?

Look at your scores on the styles instrument. The scores for integrating, compromising, and dominating flow from engaging the other. The scores for obliging and avoiding reflect a tendency to move away from conflict. Take a moment and recall an intensely emotional conflict. What was your first impulse—to engage the conflict or avoid it? For example, people who have experienced trauma, whether the trauma has been physical violence, sexual abuse, observing violent events, or trauma from separation from caregivers, traumatized people tend to avoid conflict (Johnson 2002, 42). Others, who, for instance, come from a family where loud arguments are the norm, find engaging with the other a natural choice. The following couple is struggling over how much engagement they will have:
Application 5.3

Avoid or Engage?

  Brent: There is something bothering me.
Janette: I’m way too stressed out to talk about anything right now.
  Brent: I’m upset about what you said about me at the party.
Janette: You’re picking on me. Leave me alone! Another time!
  Brent: When are we going to talk about things that bug me? You never want to talk if I’m upset.
Janette: You aren’t respecting what I told you about my stress. I’m going for a walk. See you later.
Role-play the couple portrayed above. What could each have done to:
Assert his/her needs even more articulately, while
Working with the stated needs of the other person?
Page 155
Brent wants to engage in the conflict and Janette wants to protect herself by avoiding it. Every time an issue surfaces, they will have to reach agreement on avoidance/ engagement, or this metaconflict will override any other emerging issues. Their fundamental issue is “How much conflict am I willing to risk to get what I want?” (Stuart 1980, 295). Of course, during the next conflict on a different topic, she may push for engagement and he may avoid, but usually people in a relationship specialize in one approach or the other. This overriding preference limits their ability to resolve their conflicts well.
Application 5.4

Thinking about Styles

Which is the best style for use in conflict? Read the four statements below and put a check mark by the one that you feel is the most accurate:
Avoidance of conflicts leads to unhappy partnership and work relationships—it keeps important issues buried.
Avoidance of unnecessary conflict helps promote harmony and keeps people from getting involved in unnecessary upsets.
The only way to really manage conflict is to work through it by engaging the other person.
Engagement in conflict leads to escalatory spirals and hurt for all parties.
Both avoidance and engagement are workable options in different circumstances. Recall the example of the couple struggling over their level of engagement. The woman’s avoidance may have prompted the man to examine his reaction, decide that he was too reactive in social situations, and back off to reduce the conflict. Or her avoidance may have signaled to him that she did not care for his feelings and that he should start exiting the relationship. Avoidance and lack of overt conflict may indicate that the participants are unable to reach agreement and that they will gradually drift apart.
Avoidance of conflict often leads to a cycle that is self-perpetuating. Here is a typical pattern that occurs when one avoids conflict:
We think of conflict as bad.
We get nervous about a conflict we are experiencing.
We avoid the conflict as long as possible.
The conflict gets out of control and must be confronted.
We handle it badly (Lulofs 1994).
Kristin, a conflict student, wrote an apt description of avoidance. “Whenever the conflict is one that is remotely serious, it gets dodged. Rather than stay and confront a problem, and heaven forbid hurt someone’s feelings, I run like mad. I find myself becoming a snail, silent in my shell.” Avoidance is designed to protect the self and other from discord and to preserve a relationship, yet the avoidance may lead to lack of clarity, set the stage for later uncontrollable conflict, and lead back to even more avoidance.
Page 156
Avoidance sometimes helps a relationship. Avoidance serves as a defense against engagement, or confrontation, with a partner or co-worker when the person avoiding decides that engaging a conflict would not serve a good purpose. Spouses who practice avoidance within a bond of mutual affection often describe their marriage as happy. Furthermore, if the relationship is not important to you, avoidance can conserve energy that would be expended needlessly. Similarly, if an issue is trivial to you, your easiest choice may be avoidance. In the workplace, you may have a supervisor who dislikes any conflict, so avoiding touchy topics may be a wise choice for you, as long as you can identify how to bring up new ideas.
The tension between avoiding and engaging can be seen in the following dialogue:
Application 5.5

Should I Bring Up the Problem or Let It Go?

Marjorie: Hi, Terry, what’s going on?
  Terry: Oh, not much. [He is thinking, “If I say how upset I am, we’ll get into it, and I just want to chill out.”]
Marjorie: You don’t look very happy. [She’s thinking, “I know you’re upset about my motherʼs criticism of your job search plans. We might as well talk about it.”]
  Terry: No big deal. [“I hope she just lets it go.”]
Marjorie: Are you mad at my mother? [“He must be more angry than I thought. This doesnʼt look good. Uh-oh.”]
  Terry: Why do you always have to blow everything out of proportion?
The conflict then escalates as they struggle tacitly over whether to engage or avoid. In Application 5.3, we asked you to role-play better options that preserved both individual needs and relational needs. In the case of Marjorie and Terry, discuss how more self-disclosure could help this couple keep from getting stuck in avoidance, or contain their escalation so the relationship is preserved.
In the following section, avoidance as a style will be presented.
 Avoidance

We have discussed the basic choice of whether to avoid or to engage. In this section we will explore the dynamics of avoidance as a style characterized by denial of the conflict, changing and avoiding topics, being noncommittal, and joking rather than dealing with the conflict at hand. The avoider may sidestep an issue by changing the topic or simply withdrawing from dealing with the issue. Just as use of the competitive or dominating style does not mean that one will get what one wants (because of interdependence with the other party), the use of avoidance as a style does not mean that the avoider will be ineffective. For instance, if a person is engaging in a conflict with a large organization, the organization can enhance its position by not responding to correspondence on the matter. By pretending that the conflict does not exist, the high-power party is freed from dealing with the low-power party.
Recent research calls into question some of the underlying assumptions of the dual concern model. Avoidance may be more of a neutral style than one low in concern for self and others. Nuances of motivation, skill, and context determine when and how people avoid. For instance, argumentativeness as a skill or trait influences the approach of someone in conflict. If people do not have the skills of argumentation, or if they do not enjoy arguing with others, they may be judged by others and by themselves as using an avoiding style (Guerrero and Gross 2015). Argumentativeness differs from verbal aggressiveness, which will be discussed later in this chapter.
Page 157
Avoidance can serve similar functions in interpersonal conflicts. If two roommates are both romantically interested in the same person, they may refuse to discuss the subject openly, even if both of them are aware of the potential problem. If a couple is having difficulty dealing with each other’s families, they may not feel free to discuss the problem. Avoiding a conflict, however, does not prevent it. Conflict occurs when parties have the perception of incompatible goals, regardless of the style they choose to use in responding to this perception. Avoidance is simply an alternative mode of conflict expression. Some of the advantages and disadvantages of avoidance are presented in the following box.
Avoidance
advantages

Avoidance can supply time to think of some other response to the conflict, as some people cannot “think on their feet.” It is useful if the issue is trivial or if other important issues demand oneʼs attention. If the relationship itself is unimportant to one person or if others can manage the conflict without his or her involvement, avoidance is a wise choice. Avoidance can also keep one from harm in a relationship in which anything other than avoidance will bring a negative response from the other party. If the goal is to keep from being influenced by the other party then avoidance helps to accomplish that goal.
example:

Shirley is a 23-year-old graduate who has recently broken off a long relationship with a man her parents like very much. They ask her to tell them “what went wrong” and offer to pay for a trip to visit him. Shirley decides not to take them up on the trip offer and says, “Many things happened to make us want to break up. Thanks for caring about me.” She avoided a discussion that she felt would end in conflict.
disadvantages

Avoidance may signal to others that you do not “care enough to confront” them. It also may give the impression that you cannot change. It allows conflict to simmer and heat up unnecessarily rather than providing an avenue for reducing it. It keeps one from working through a conflict and reinforces the notion that conflict is best avoided. It allows partners each to follow their own course and pretend there is no mutual influence when, in fact, each influences the other. It usually preserves the conflict and sets the stage for a later explosion or backlash.
example:

Take the case of Sarah. She lives with her father who was recently divorced. Normally, he planned dinners each night, but with Valentineʼs Day approaching Sarah planned a dinner with her girlfriend, Cathy. When Dad found out, he said, “Well the three of us could just go out.” Sarah, instead of engaging a discussion about it, said, “It is ok if you come, it wasnʼt like we were planning on a fancy restaurant or anything.” Later, Sarah said, “I know it is stupid that I canʼt stand up for myself to my dad, but I feel sorry for him. He is so lonely and misses mom so much that it would break his heart if I told him he smothers me and treats me like a child. I cannot figure out a way to explain my feelings to him without offending him.” The chances are that sometime later, Sarah will explode at her dad.
Page 158
In marriages, avoidance of conflict relates to lower satisfaction in general. Be aware that stonewalling and avoidance are different approaches—stonewalling is a hostile tactic (see Chapter 1). In one study, partners who believed in their first year of marriage that conflicts should be avoided also reported lower levels of happiness in the first 3 years of marriage than those who believed that conflicts should not be avoided (Crohan 1992). In some more “traditional” marriages, however, stability and predictability are emphasized and continual renegotiation of what the spouses expect of one another is not useful. As Pike and Sillars (1985) found, “Satisfied couples used conflict avoidance to a greater extent than dissatisfied couples” (319). Similarly, for couples who are not traditional and who lead somewhat independent lives, “Avoidance may be a satisfying style of communication” (321).
Avoidance also can affect the one avoiding. Avoidance of important issues tends to result in health problems, and worsens a sense of well-being avoidance (Braman 1998; Nicolotti, el-Sheikh, and Whitson 2003).
Finally, older couples in our culture who avoid conflict can often be characterized as happy, although inexpressive (Zietlow and Sillars 1988). Avoidance can be useful and appropriate when (1) open communication is not an integral part of the system (family or organization); (2) people do not want to invest the energy to “work through” the conflict to reach agreement with others—they want to stay at arm’s length and not get close; (3) the costs of confrontation are too high; or (4) one simply hasn’t learned how to engage in collaborative conflict management.
Avoidance and Culture

Whether avoidance is productive or destructive generally depends on the cultural contexts (Komarraju, Dollinger, and Lovell 2008). For some people, there are different and important reasons for avoiding. For instance, in one study comparing American and Chinese people, three different and important reasons emerged for avoiding: (1) protection of the avoider from harm, (2) maintenance of positive mood, or (3) for spiritual or philosophical reasons (Feng and Wilson 2011). There are, of course, differences across different collectivist cultures on avoidance (Leung, Brew, Zhang, and Zang 2011). One study compared Chinese, Korean, and Japanese employees and found that the Japanese were more likely to avoid (Kim, Wang, Kondo, and Kim 2007). The Japanese avoid conflict in order to preserve congeniality and consensus and out of sensitivity to others’ feelings. In Japan, when one avoids, the implicit social hierarchy is reinforced—so avoidance makes sure the social bonds are not disrupted (Ohbuchi and Atsumi 2010). In China, the appropriateness of conflict behavior may be judged more positively than the effectiveness of the behavior. In the United States, effectiveness of a partner’s conflict behavior ranks as more important than appropriateness (Qin Zhang 2015).
In such collectivistic cultures, when you avoid a conflict, others will talk to you about how to heal wounds, make amends, and solve the conflict in indirect ways. In individualistic cultures, like the United States, on the other hand, if you avoid someone as the result of a conflict, your friends might cheer you on, suggesting that you “don’t have to take that junk” and making other escalatory suggestions. Depending on the culture, those around you push you either to reconciliation or into continual fighting. In collectivistic cultures, one is “more concerned with the group’s needs, goals and interests than with individualistic-oriented interest” (Trubisky, Ting-Toomey, and Lin 1991, 67). Thus, avoidance serves different functions in collectivistic cultures than in individualistic ones (Ohbuchi and Atsumi 2010). In collectivistic cultures, avoidance represents “indirect working through,” but in individualistic cultures, avoidance represents “indirect escalation.”
Page 159
In Arab cultures, usually united by language and religion, ethnic identity remains stronger than in the highly multicultural U.S. environment. Young Arab men, residing temporarily in the United States, seem to prefer the avoiding style more than American young men, which preserves the needs of the group rather than the individual (Khakimova, Yan Bing Zhang, and Hall 2012). Because young people in Arab cultures are used to calling on elders and community leaders for intervention in conflict (a third-party approach), we would be mistaken to assume that Arab young men prefer avoidance. Again, this picture of conflict styles remains nuanced and complicated.
The Avoid/Criticize Loop

In the avoid/criticize loop, two destructive communication behaviors come into play; avoiding the topic while criticizing another person directly or indirectly. You avoid talking about the actual conflict issues while at the same time criticizing. Examples of this avoid/criticize construction follow:
“I will talk with you about finances when you stop spending every single extra dollar you make on your stupid, expensive toys.”
“Terry is really too sensitive to talk with about anything this important. I thought you and I could work it out.” (criticizing another and forming a coalition)
“I tried to talk with Peter about his leadership style, but he blew me off, so I called this team meeting.” (gossip, coalitions, using power indirectly, avoiding the real issue of Peter’s leadership style)
“I will not deal with someone so devious.”
In these examples, the speakers indirectly ask others to accept a negative description of their behavior before they talk, or the speakers avoid by involving others in indirect criticism. No one wants to accept an unflattering description as a prerequisite for continuing a conversation. The avoid/criticize system usually continues both avoidance and escalation, because of frustration, resentment, and defensiveness. When you are the recipient of such communication, say something like, “I don’t want to argue with you about your perception of me. I’d like to talk about the issue of finances. If we have a trust issue, or disagree, I am willing to talk about that. It doesn’t work for you to attack me and then expect me to be open.” If you are brought into an indirect avoid/criticize situation, you might say, “I’d prefer you talk with Peter about that, or if we all do,” or “I haven’t found Terry impossible to talk with. What have you tried?”
The avoid/criticize loop is common in professional circles and the business world. One talks about others, but doesn’t join with them face-to-face to solve the problem. Especially if you are good at your job, you can really get involved in criticizing others—“He doesn’t understand the new initiative,” “She hasn’t had the training to see this accurately,” “He is just so negative I can’t stand to be in meetings with him.” Statements framed as critique substitute for a constructive request. We make the other wrong, through blaming and criticism, yet do not give the other a chance to correct. When you add self-righteous indignation to the mix, the conflict will not reach resolution.
Page 160

Avoidant Communication Strategies

Below are some of the ways one can avoid a conflict.2
Not speaking and remaining quiet.
Refusing to answer or talk saying, “I don’t have an opinion” or “Whatever you think is fine with me” or “We will not have that discussion in this house.”
Deflecting or changing the topic, “What do you think about this storm forecast?” or “I don’t want to talk about it.”
Talking in abstract terms (when someone is attacking your lack of commitment), saying, “What do you think about the effects of long engagements?”
Leave the scene—to physically exit a situation.
Joking. Making a joke that diffuses the anger, changes the topic, or alters the mood to impact the conflict.
Smiling or laughing to change the mood.
Asking questions—“Gee John, tell me again what was it like growing up in Iowa?”
Supplying conflict irrelevant information.
Avoidance of the topic is, however, different from postponement. In the first example Gloria uses avoidance, in the second, postponement.
Gloria is upset. She wants to talk to her husband, Sam, late at night. Sam, however, has an appointment at eight o’clock in the morning.
Gloria: I am so upset that I can’t sleep. Whatever possessed you to talk about our summer plans to Sara and Josh at the party? You know we’ve been trying to get free of doing things with them. You said last week—
  Sam: Can’t we talk about this in the morning?
Gloria: It’s fine for you to say that. You don’t have to deal with Sara when she calls tomorrow to decide where we’ll travel for a joint vacation. I have to talk to her and tell her we changed our minds.
  Sam: I’m sorry I brought it up. But I’m sleepy, and I don’t want to talk about it.
Page 161
At this point, the avoidance tactic Sam is using—“Maybe if I close my eyes all this hassle will go away”—is certainly not productive. His twin goals—to get some sleep and to avoid further antagonizing his wife—are not likely to be met. By this time Gloria is probably angry not only about his lack of discretion at the party but also about his refusal to talk to her about it. An example of a productive postponement tactic follows:
  Sam: Gloria, I know you’re upset. I also feel foolish. But I am exhausted, and I really don’t want to deal with all the issues now. When Sara calls tomorrow, tell her we haven’t had a chance to talk yet and you’ll call her back. Then when I come home from work tomorrow, we’ll discuss the whole thing.
Gloria: You always say that, and we never talk.
  Sam: This time we will. We’ll sit down before dinner, banish the kids, and the two of us will talk. I know you’re upset.
Gloria: OK, if we really will talk. I know it’s hard to know what to say in public like that. They presume so much . . .
Postponement as a tactic works best when several conditions are present. First of all, the emotional content of the conflict needs to be acknowledged while other issues are deferred to a later time. Sam said, “I know you’re upset,” acknowledging the depth of Gloria’s feelings. She would not probably go along with the postponement if he had said, “It’s stupid for you to be upset. We’ll work it out later.” After the emotional content is acknowledged, all parties have to agree on a time that is soon and realistic. If Sam had said, “We’ll talk about it sometime soon,” that would not have been precise enough. The other party has to believe that the postponer really means to bring up the issue later. Postponement does not work well as a tactic if the other people involved think they are being put off, never to return to the issue. Vague statements such as “We’ll have to work on that sometime” or “Let’s all try harder to get along” are often giveaways that the person wants avoidance rather than genuine postponement. Postponement can enhance or damage the relationship conflict.
Although performances of avoidance come in many costumes, their function is typically to deflect, avoid, and not engage in the conflict. Whether a professor who is confronted about a grade says, “That’s an interesting point. It brings up an interesting question” (abstract remark), or a supervisor says, “That’s enough complaining. Let’s get back to the job” (topic shift), the basic dynamic is the same—to avoid the conflict.
 Dominating

A dominating, competitive, or “power over” style is characterized by aggressive and uncooperative behavior—pursuing your own concerns at the expense of another. People with dominating styles attempt to gain power by direct confrontation, by trying to “win” the argument without adjusting to the other’s goals and desires. A person with a competitive style is one who usually thinks it necessary to engage the other participant in overt disagreement. The conflict is seen as a “battleground,” where winning is the goal, and concern for the other is of little or no importance. Someone who adopts a competitive style in conflicts would probably agree with statements such as, “Once I get wound up in a heated discussion, I find it difficult to stop,” and “I like the excitement of engaging in verbal fights.”
Page 162
Dominating tactics can be employed in an assertive rather than an aggressive manner. In this case, competition is a more descriptive word than dominating. Usually, however, aggression creeps into a competitive style. While nonassertive people deny themselves and inhibit their expression of feelings and open striving for goals, assertive people enhance the self and work toward achieving desired goals, and are expressive. The aggressive person, however, carries the desire for self-expression to the extreme. Goals are accomplished at the expense of others. The aggressive style results in a put-down of others while the aggressor actively works against their goals. The assertive person can be competitive without berating, ridiculing, or damaging the other. The aggressive person is competitive primarily by trying to destroy the opponent’s options. Verbal aggressiveness hurts the face, self-esteem, or reputation of the other. When a person is argumentative, but not aggressive, the ability to work toward shared problem solving remains alive (Guerrero and Gross 2014).
The dominating style of managing conflict can turn out to be productive if you compete to accomplish individual goals without destroying the other person. The relationship focus is maintained even while the topic is debated. Competition can be productively used in conflict, especially if the participants agree about the amount of aggressiveness that can legitimately be used in their conflict. The following box summarizes the advantages, as well as the disadvantages, of dominating.
Dominating
advantages

Verbal domination can be appropriate and useful when one has to take quick, decisive action, such as in an emergency. Such verbal strength can generate creative ideas when others respond well to it or when one is in a situation in which the best performance or ideas are rewarded. It is useful if the external goal is more important than the relationship with the other person, such as in a short-term, nonrepeating relationship.
Dominating also informs the other of oneʼs degree of commitment to the issue and can be used to demonstrate to the other party the importance of the issue. When everyone agrees that dominating behavior is a sign of strength and when the behavior is treated as a “natural” response, such as in games, sports, or in a court battle, the style serves good purposes. In these cases, other styles may not bring the expected closure.
example:

A human services agency competes with others for grant money from United Way. A limited amount is available, so the best proposal for solving a human services problem will be funded. The director of the agency competes with other directors for funding. The larger good of the community is served by the best programʼs gaining support.
disadvantages

Dominating responses can harm the relationship between the parties because of the focus on external goals. Competition can be harmful if one party is unable or unwilling to deal with conflict in a head-on manner. Conflict waged competitively can encourage one party to go underground and use covert means to make the other pay. Domination tends to reduce all conflicts to two options—“either you are against me or with me,” which limits oneʼs role to “winning” or “losing.”
example:

Greg and Marcie, both young, competitive salespeople for the same company, live together. Their manager rewards them, unsurprisingly, for high sales. The couple keeps track of whoʼs ahead of the other by placing a chart on the refrigerator. The weekʼs loser has to do the laundry for the week. However, when Marcieʼs sales are low, because she has been ill and has missed a lot of work, she angrily proclaims to Greg, “Iʼm not your servant! Do your own damn laundry!” Their relationship and her identity suffered from the “loss.”
Page 163
Especially when both parties agree that a competitive style is the norm, the style can be useful. Competitiveness can be a sign of strength or commitment. For example, two attorneys who one-up each other during negotiation are each attempting to persuade the other to alter each other’s position. This dominating style may actually be a form of bluffing.
At the same time, dominating or competitive tactics can damage a relationship, lock the participants into round-robin sequences of attack on each other, and deprive the participants of cooperative solutions to their problems. In severe cases, a dominating style can become self-encapsulating—the participants can’t give up or stop because they get too caught up in winning at any cost. When people launch never-ending court challenges against one another or continue to verbally abuse their ex-spouses for many decades, such approaches indicate a frozen position of dominating. The ever-competitive combatants lose all perspective on the original goal, and they dedicate their energies to triumphing over the other.
Threats

The most commonly used dominating tactic is the threat. We rush to use threats because we believe they are effective (Thompson et al. 2011). Many parents are too quick to say, “Do your homework or you’re grounded” or in the grocery store, “Touch those cans again and I’ll lock you in the trunk of the car!” Supervisors will say, “My way or the highway”—a misguided attempt to build a team.
Figure 5.2 shows that a threat has to meet two criteria: The source of the threat must control the outcome and the threat must be seen as negative by the recipient. If you (the source) control the outcome (“If you don’t go to bed in three minutes, I won’t read you a story”) and the sanction is seen as negative, then it is a threat. Similarly, if the professor says, “If you don’t get your paper in on time, I will dock your grade,” it is a threat. However, if the source does not control the outcome (a friend says, “If you don’t get your paper in on time, it will hurt your grade”), the comment is not a threat—it is a warning.
Page 164

Figure 5.2 The Nature of Threats
Many parents get confused between warnings and threats. For example, “If you drink too much, you’ll never graduate” seems like a threat, but it is not because the parent does not control the outcome. Yet, if the parent says, “Stop partying so much or I won’t pay for next semester,” it is a threat. Or, if you say to a friend, “If you cheat on your boyfriend, he will leave you,” you are issuing a warning. If you say, “I wouldn’t challenge her on that topic,” you are recommending a course of action to your friend.
Small children understand the difference between a positive and a negative sanction. If the parent says, “If you don’t do the dishes, you’ll have to spend the evening in your room,” and the child has a computer or TV so going to the room is not negative, the child may well retort, “Is that a threat or a promise?” As you can see, if the source controls the outcome and the recipient sees the outcome as positive, the threat is, instead, a promise.
A threat is usually credible if (1) the source is in a position to administer the punishment, (2) the source appears willing to invoke the punishment, and (3) the punishment is something to be avoided. Often, the other party is able to administer a threat but not willing to follow through. A co-worker who threatens to tell the boss you broke a rule may not carry out the threat if the boss dislikes “whistle-blowers.” Similarly, in an intimate relationship, one partner might say, “If you want to make your summer plans alone, go ahead. But if you do, then don’t expect to find me here when you come back.” Such a threat (relational suicide) is effective only if the person who makes the threat is willing to lose the other person over this one issue. The perception that the other party is willing to carry out the threat makes it effective. As a result, intimates often avoid testing the willingness of the other party to invoke the threat and instead live under the control of the other person for years. In poker, a “bluff” is when you bet a lot (but have a weak group of cards) as a way to get the other people to “fold” and give you the winnings. The only successful bluff is one that the other party believes is true.
Finally, threats are effective only if the sanction is something the threatened party wants to avoid. One faculty member was offered a job at a competing university; when he went to the department chair and threatened to leave unless his salary was raised, the chair replied, “I hope you enjoy the climate down South.”
Page 165
As you have seen, threats can be constructive and destructive. They can be used constructively to highlight the importance of the conflict topic to you, to get the attention of the other party, and to clarify one’s perceptions of the power balance. On another level, threats tend to elicit the same behavior from the other, starting escalatory conflict spirals. They also block collaborative agreements and undermine trust in the relationship. Worse, we can become enamored of them (Kellermann and Shea 1996). If two roommates in a campus residence hall have been getting along well except for the issue of sweeping the floor, then a threat of “If you don’t sweep more often, I’ll process a room change!” might damage the trust in an otherwise good relationship. The recipient of the threat is likely to respond with a feeling of “OK, then go ahead. Who needs you anyway?” Unless trust can be regained, forging agreements will be extremely difficult. Once a threat has damaged the trust in the relationship, it often leads to further destructive tactics. Threats are overused, used too quickly, destroy trust, and tend to promote retaliation.
Application 5.6

Threats in Personal Relationships

Think of a time when you were threatened, or you used threats. What happened? Looking back, do you think the threats were effective in solving a problem and keeping the relationship intact? Were they harmful? What have you learned about your personal response to using threats or being threatened verbally?
Which of the following was true for you when you were the recipient of a threat or when you used a threat?
I felt justified and right.
I could not think of anything else to do.
I wanted to hurt the other person.
I wanted to get even after I was threatened.
My feelings for/with the other person changed to fear, contempt, humiliation, rage, helplessness, or vengeance.
I managed to avoid the other person.
I broke the relationship, finally.
I didnʼt like myself for issuing the threat.
I didnʼt like myself for changing my behavior when someone threatened me.
I felt hate/hated.
I felt regret or remorse.
Can you think of positive outcomes of giving or receiving a threat? Discuss these with your small group.
Threats introduce a risk in a relationship. Even if a credible threat is carried out, with the resulting win–lose negative sanction, what is gained? The immediate problem may be temporarily resolved, but the main goals (1) to solve the problem and (2) to preserve the relationship for work or closeness have not been met. The use of the threat automatically damages the second goal, “preserve the relationship.”
Destructive Domination

Dominating tactics involve being verbally competitive—striving for an individual “win.” These tactics have a win/lose orientation and reflect a belief that what one person gets, the other loses. As a result, the party using competitive tactics will try to one-up the other party to gain an advantage.
Page 166
If someone personally criticizes you, rejects your statements, or acts in a verbally hostile manner (with threats, jokes, or questions), you become vividly aware of the competitive nature of the exchange. Confrontational remarks are at the heart of “I win–you lose” perspectives on conflict. Just as with avoidance tactics, dominating tactics are often used in combination. A dominating approach demands that the other give in, take responsibility for the conflict, and solve it.
Illustrations of Dominating Statements
“Oh, come on.”
“Youʼre exaggerating.”
“If you do that once more, you are grounded.”
“I am the expert here.”
“Listen, when you are in the kitchen I am the boss.”
“Who told you that I would care about your opinion?”
“You are just stupid.”
“I am not going to stop until I win.”
Drugs and alcohol usually make conflict worse. We often hear stories about someone being drunk physically or verbally aggressive. Research on this is quite clear—there is a definite link between substance abuse and harmful competitive tactics. Alcohol especially makes conflict episodes much more damaging (Edelgard and Colsman 2002; Huang et al. 2001; MacDonald, Zanna, and Holmes 2000). It is so common that we say, Never engage in a conflict when you or the other has been drinking. Also, other drugs have even more dramatic effects. The recent surge in methamphetamine use is often correlated with violent interpersonal aggression. So, if you want your conflicts to be less damaging, avoid engaging difficult issues when you or the other is under the influence of a substance.
The dominating style often leads the other to mirror that style. Often, the person who feels powerless and victimized escalates the conflict to a point, then gives up, thinking, “There’s nothing I can do to win anyway.” In effect, the participants cooperate in the escalation. A very angry person was once observed trying to take over the microphone and the floor at a convention. He shouted loudly, disrupted the proceedings, and was finally given 5 minutes to state his case. He did so, supporting with vehemence the pullout of his church group from a large national group, which he perceived as being too progressive. He chose the dominating style to escalate the conflict—soon he and the chairman were yelling back and forth at each other. When he gained the microphone, however, he followed the rules, spoke, and sat down.
Page 167
Verbal Aggressiveness and Verbal Abuse

Verbal aggressiveness and verbal abuse are forms of communication violence. Rather than just telling others what might happen to them (using a threat or warning), people using verbal aggression attack the self-concepts of the others (Infante and Wigley 2011). Character attacks (“You are just a rotten wife”), insults (“Well, I suppose someone with your intelligence would see it that way”), rough teasing, ridicule, humiliation, and profanity all are forms of verbal aggression. In individualistic cultures, aggressive and abusive talk is common. It attacks the other’s character, background, abilities, physical appearance, and the like. The more important your relationship is with someone, the more the verbal aggression typically hurts (Avtgis and Rancer 2010; Martin, Anderson, and Horvath 1996). At the same time, in a collectivist culture, the most damaging verbal abuse is directed toward a person’s group, clan, tribe, village, or family, such as when you say, “He’s a drunken Irishman” (Vissing and Baily 1996), or “You people are all animals.”
Many conflict parties, those who use a dominating style, immediately begin to verbally attack with abusive language. Once you focus on the other as the sole person who is responsible for relational difficulties, it is easy to slip into disparaging personal remarks. The following are examples of verbal abuse and aggressiveness:
‘You’re so stupid.’
‘You’re an imbecile.’
‘You’re ugly.’
‘You’re low class.’
‘I wish you would die/get hit by a car/fall off the face of the earth.’
‘No one else would have you.’
One study examined the use of verbal aggression in college-age couples and found that based on 5,000 American couples, men and women engage in equal amounts of verbal aggression (Sabourin 1995), and other studies show this to be the case (Archer 2000; Ehrensaft, Moffitt, and Caspi 2006). If an occasional lapse into verbal aggression occurred, partners seemed able to absorb it, but in distressed relationships, verbal aggression was associated with ineffective conversation skills and was much more frequent than in satisfactory relationships. The most damaging style results from people knowing little about how to argue (argument can be positive), who, therefore, resort to verbal aggressiveness. (See Guerrero and Gross [2014] for an overview of the issues surrounding argumentativeness and verbal aggressiveness.)
Most people recognize verbal abuse. When we hear someone in public verbally abusing another, we cringe. The person engaging in verbal aggression most often doesn’t perceive their communication as aggressive. People who exhibit high verbal aggressiveness claim that 46% of their verbally aggressive messages are humorous (Infante, Rancer, and Wigley 2011; Infante et al. 1992). Labeling a verbally aggressive comment as humor usually convinces no one except the aggressive speaker. Outsiders tend to view verbally aggressive people as less credible and as having fewer valid arguments than those who don’t use aggressive language (Guerrero and Gross 2014; Infante et al. 1992). If a couple is verbally aggressive, they tend to infuriate each other and lack the skill to undo the relationship damage (Sabourin 1995).
Verbal aggression is closely associated with physical abuse. Verbal aggression precedes and predicts physical aggression in adolescents and in marriage and other romantic relationships (Murphy and Smith 2010; Sabourin and Stamp 1995; White and Humphrey 1994). Adding injury to insult, verbally aggressive couples usually do not perceive their aggression as a problem (Vivian and Langhinrichsen-Rohling 1994).
Page 168
Sometimes, researchers label verbally aggressive tactics as harassment. A direct verbal attack on another can have serious consequences. In Sweden, for example, an estimated 100–300 people each year commit suicide as a result of harassment by work colleagues (Bjorkqvist et al. 1994). One study found that in a Finnish university, women were more often harassed than men, and women holding administrative and service jobs were harassed more than female professors (Bjorkqvist, Osterman, and Hjelt-Back 1994). Making negative comments about appearance or clothing is considered harassment if the speaker is in a high-power relationship with the “target” person. Additionally, if a high-power person ridicules a low-power person’s mode of speech or makes sexually explicit suggestions or observations, harassment is occurring. Finally, when a high-power person negatively labels a low-power person’s personality, using words such as “brain-dead,” “loser,” “whiner,” “bitch,” or “wimp,” the target person is being harassed. Such comments, whether labeled “harassment” or “verbal aggression,” can occur at home, on the job, in public, or in any type of relationship. And sometimes, these destructive verbal tactics escalate to the next level—physical violence.
Extremely verbally abusive tactics can be characterized by the “rapist” style. In the rapist style (this metaphor is not meant to imply only sexual behavior but all kinds of dominating communicative behavior), participants “function through power, through an ability to apply psychic and physical sanctions, through rewards and especially punishments, and through commands and threats” (Brockriede 1972, 2). The conflict or argument is often escalated, since participants are interested in coercion rather than agreement. The goal of those using the rapist style is to manipulate and violate the personhood of the “victims,” or other parties in the conflict. Verbal aggression feels like, and is, a violation of the humanity of the other, like rape.
Coercive control also characterizes extreme domination, resting on highly unequal power. Coercive control is a form of intimate partner violence (IPV), because extreme coercion often does escalate into physical violence. Dominators use invisible chains to control every aspect of an intimate partner’s life, in order to gain power over the partner. Even well-educated people can become enmeshed in coercive control. As in other forms of domination, knowing the signs of coercion help the potential victim stop the pattern before violence occurs.
Bullying is another extreme form of dominating. Some dominators resort to bullying so frequently that it should be considered a subset of the style of domination. In Chapter 8, we provide an in-depth discussion on the aggressive practices that shape bullying and the impact bullying makes on vulnerable people.
In IPV, verbal aggression almost always precedes a pattern of coercive control, and continues throughout all levels of IPV. Dominating communication creates and carries IPV.
Because verbal aggression leads to bullying and intimate partner or family violence, children and adults must be given opportunities in school, friend groups, support groups, popular books, and on the media to recognize and confront verbal aggression. One of the most helpful practical books on verbal aggression remains The Verbally Abusive Relationship (Evans 2010). You can find many other good resources on verbal aggression on the Web.
Abuse occurs digitally, as well as in person. Technology presents new opportunities for indirect, but powerful, verbal abuse (indirect only because people are not face-to-face). Regardless of gender and age, many people experience online dating violence, relationship abuse, and intimate partner abuse.
Page 169
People can be, however, trained to stop using verbal aggression (Brinkert 2010; Infante and Wigley 2011; Krueger 2011). Learning how to argue without attacking the other’s self is one of the key steps in stopping verbal aggression, as well as controlling the emotional flooding associated with verbal abuse and verbal aggression. On the other side, if individuals can recognize the signs of possible escalation, they might be able to seek help (Murphy and Smith 2010). The popular “That’s Not Cool” media campaign against verbal abuse helps educate people on both sides of the verbal abuse divide. Communication strategies that helped women in heterosexual relationships deal with digital verbal abuse were grouped around avoiding, such as maintaining boundaries, and speaking out on behalf of victims. Teens and young women can be taught to delete offensive messages, to network with other women, and to make connections with dominant group members (men) who will help them (Weathers and Hopson 2016). The support of dominant group members is essential in overcoming various forms of verbal abuse.
Aggressive behaviors do not always occur in overt or explicit ways. Micro-aggressions are an additional type of aggression that occur within communication in more subtle ways. Nadal (2008) defines micro-aggressions as “brief and commonplace daily verbal, behavioral, or environmental indignities, whether intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile, derogatory, or negative slights and insults toward members of oppressed groups” (23; see also Sue 2010). Because they are less visible and often deemed socially acceptable, these aggressions accumulate, or build up, over time. So do their effects. Micro-aggressions commonly focus on issues of race and ethnicity (de la Garza 2020; Griffin 2012; Harris et al. 2019; Sue et al. 2019; see also Harris and Moffitt 2019) and gender and sexuality (Berry 2018; Berry, Gillotti, and Adams 2020; Glave 2003/2004; Kosciw et al. 2014; Nadal 2008; Yoshino 2007). The ongoing and subtle nature of micro-aggressions leads some people who endure them to refer to this aggression as feeling like “a never-ending paper cut.”
Micro-aggressions regularly appear in everyday utterances that comprise our communication. For instance, each of the following statements illustrate micro-aggressions about race and sexuality:
Race:
“The speaker at tonight’s public lecture . . . an articulate Black man . . . was wonderful!”
“I have always wondered what it would be like to have cornrows . . . may I touch your hair?”
“When I look at you, I don’t see color.”
“America is a ‘melting pot’.”
“As a woman, I know the pressures you face as a racial minority.”
Sexuality:
“That’s so gay!”
“You two are gay and in a relationship—which one of you is the man and who is the woman?”
“You’re gay?” a single heterosexual woman asks a gay man. “What a waste of a good looking man!”
“You’re gay—you would be the perfect person to plan my party.”
“No homo”
Page 170
“Questions on Micro-aggressions”
It is important to reflect on your use of micro-aggressions. Here are some questions to get you started:
Which one of the above statements have you used when communicating with others? Which have you heard others use? What are other examples of micro-aggressions concerning race and sexuality? Micro-aggressions about other aspects of difference (e.g., ability status, class)?
How does it feel to say them? If you are a person who lives with difference, how does it feel to hear them?
Why is it important to avoid micro-aggressions in conflict and communication, more generally? When is it important to confront others who use them? What would you say to that person if you were doing the confronting?
 Compromise

Compromise is an intermediate style resulting in some gains and some losses for each party. It is moderately assertive and cooperative. A compromising style is characterized by beliefs such as “You can be satisfied with part of the pie” and “Give a little and get a little.” When compromising, parties give up some important goals to gain others. Compromise is dependent on shared power because if the other party is perceived as powerless, no compelling reason to compromise exists.
Compromise is frequently confused with integrating, which requires creative solutions and flexibility. Compromise differs, however, in that it requires trade-offs and exchanges. Many times people avoid using compromise because something valuable has to be given up. While North American norms, especially in public life, encourage compromising, the style is not often the first choice in personal relationships. When power is unequal, compromising is usually seen as giving in or giving up. The following box summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of compromising.
Page 171
Compromising
advantages

Compromise sometimes lets conflict parties accomplish important goals with less time expenditure than integrating requires. It also reinforces a power balance that can be used to achieve temporary or expedient settlements in time-pressured situations. It can be used as a backup method for decision making when other styles fail. Further, it has the advantage of external moral force; therefore, it appears reasonable to most parties. Compromise works best when other styles have failed or are clearly unsuitable.
example:

Mark and Sheila, ages 10 and 8, both want to play with the new computer game they received for Christmas. After a noisy argument, their parents tell them to work something out that is fair. They decide that if no one else is using the game, they can play without asking. However, if they both want to play at the same time, they have to either play a game together or take turns by hours (every other hour). The compromise of taking turns works well as a conflict reduction device. The parents can intervene simply by asking, “Whose turn is it?”
disadvantages

Compromise can become an easy way out—a “formula” solution not based on the demands of a particular situation. For some people, compromise always seems to be a form of “loss” rather than a form of “win.” It prevents creative new options because it is easy and handy to use. Flipping a coin or “splitting the difference” can be a sophisticated form of avoidance of issues that need to be discussed. These chance measures, such as drawing straws or picking a number, are not really compromise. They are arbitration, with the “arbiter” being chance. True compromise requires each side to give something in order to get an agreement; she is selling a bike and I pay more than I want to and she gets less than she wants for the bike.
example:

Two friends from home decide to room together at college. Meghan wants to live in Manchester Hall with some other friends she has met. Kate wants to live in Brantley Hall, an all-female residence hall, so she can have more privacy. They decide that it wouldnʼt be fair for either one to get her first choice, so they compromise on Walker Hall, where neither knows anyone. At midyear, they want to change roommates since neither is happy with the choice. Meghan and Kate might have been able to come up with a better solution if they had worked at it.
Research has not specified compromise tactics to the degrees of specificity of avoidance and dominating, but some samples are:
Fairness (“I gave in last time, now it is your turn.”)
Split the difference (“I have come up $10,000 and if you would come down by a similar amount, we could complete the sale.”)
Change roles (“You did it last time, now it is my turn to lead.”)
Meet in the middle (“We both have to give something in order to get something— I suggest a middle ground.”)
Temporary solution (“Since we don’t have time to work out all the details, how about we agree on all the major points and set a time for working on the rest?”)
Page 172
One’s view of compromise is a good litmus test of how you view conflict in general. Think about the famous “the cup is half empty” versus “the cup is half full” aphorism that applies to compromise. Some see compromise as “both of us lose something” and others see it as “both of us win something.” Clearly, compromise means a middle ground between you and the other and involves a moderate and balanced amount of concern for self and concern for other. “Compromises” can result from good-faith efforts, and may be very effective solutions. Compromise as a style sometimes shortchanges the conflict process, whereas at other times it effectively deals with the reality that not everyone can get everything they want. Compromise should not be viewed simply as a passive approach, since sometimes personal restraint, goodwill, and taking care of the relationship require a high degree of concentration and energy.
 Obliging

The term obliging is the same as accommodation. The dictionary defines obliging as “willing to do a service or kindness; helpful.” You oblige or accommodate to the other’s needs. One who practices obliging does not assert individual needs but prefers a cooperative and harmonizing approach (Neff and Harter 2002). The individual sets aside his or her concerns in favor of pleasing the other people involved (this relational goal may be the most important goal for the accommodating person).
One may gladly yield to someone else or may do so grudgingly and bitterly. The accompanying emotion can differ for those using obliging, from gentle pleasure at smoothing ruffled feelings to angry, hostile compliance. The accommodating persons may think that they are serving the good of the group, family, or team by giving in, sacrificing, or stepping aside. Sometimes this is true; other times, however, the accommodators could better serve the needs of the larger group by staying engaged longer and using a more assertive style. Sometimes people who habitually use this style play the role of the martyr, bitter complainer, whiner, or saboteur. They may yield in a passive way or concede.
The following box summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of obliging.
Page 173
Obliging
advantages

When one finds that he is wrong, it can be best to accommodate the other to demonstrate reasonableness. If an issue is important to one person and not important to the other, the latter can give a little to gain a lot. In addition, obliging can prevent one party from harming the other—one can minimize losses when she will probably lose anyway. If harmony or maintenance of the relationship is currently the most crucial goal, obliging allows the relationship to continue without overt conflict. Obliging to a senior or seasoned person can be a way of managing conflict by betting on the most experienced personʼs judgment.
example:

A forest service manager asks the newest staff member if he is interested in learning about land trades with other federal agencies. The new employee knows that the manager must assign someone from his office to help the person in charge of land trades. The employee says, “Itʼs not something I know much about, but I wouldnʼt mind learning.” The manager, who could have assigned the new employee anyway, thanks him for his positive attitude about new responsibilities. The new employeeʼs goals would not have been well served by his saying, “I have no interest in getting into that area. There is too much red tape, and it moves too slowly.”
disadvantages

Obliging can foster an undertone of competitiveness if people develop a pattern of showing each other how nice they can be. People can one-up others by showing how eminently reasonable they are. Obliging of this type tends to reduce creative options. Further, if partners overuse obliging, their commitment to the relationship is never tested, since one or the other always gives in. This pattern can result in a pseudo-solution, especially if one or both parties resent the obliging; it will almost surely boomerang later. Obliging can further one personʼs lack of power. It may signal to that person that the other is not invested enough in the conflict to struggle through, thus, encouraging the low-power party to withhold energy and caring. A female student wrote the following example of a learned pattern of avoidance and its resulting obliging.
example:

“In our home, conflict was avoided or denied at all costs, so I grew up without seeing conflicts managed in a satisfactory way, and I felt that conflict was somehow ‘bad’ and would never be resolved. This experience fit well with the rewards of being a ‘good’ girl (accommodating to others), which combined so I was not even sensitive to wishes and desires that might lead to conflict.”
Some of the common responses of obliging or accommodating are:
“Whatever.”
“It just does not matter to me—I will agree to see any movie you want.”
“If you want to move out of state, Iʼm sure we can make it work long distance.”
“I donʼt want to fight about this.”
“Whatever you say.”
“Iʼm really ok about any restaurant you pick.”
“Its ok, Iʼll just work on the weekend to complete the contract.”
“It is more important to me that we are OK, rather than get what I want.”
Obliging is one of the most common responses to conflict between people, but it is often the least noticed. One of the reasons is that when someone accommodates, you may not even be aware of it. If you say, “I want to go sledding” and your brother says, “whatever,” obliging has occurred. If it were more overt, like dominating moves, it would be easier to see. As a result, few communication studies look intensely at obliging—they just don’t see it. Recently, the trait of verbal benevolence has attracted the attention of researchers (Guerrero and Gross 2014). Those who make sincere, supportive comments to their conflict partners may be obliging or avoiding; the addition of kind and courteous comments helps mitigate against possible downsides of avoiding and obliging. Supportive comments, if truthful, always help the relational and identity levels of conflict. Even process conflict can benefit from verbal benevolence, as when someone says, “I can see why you want to continue discussing this. You have studied this for a long time, and have a lot to contribute. I regret that we must make a decision now, because of the time demands.”
Page 174
If you automatically agree with everything your romantic partner suggests, this may have become such a patterned response that you don’t even realize you are obliging. In a “traditional” marriage, if the husband comes home for dinner and says, “How about turkey tonight?” an accommodating wife will say, “OK, I bet I have some frozen we can thaw out, and I can make gravy.” While she was planning on beef stroganoff, she automatically adjusts to his preferences and accommodates. In a conventional heterosexual relationship, the man may try to make his partner happy by agreeing to do whatever she wants to do on a date night. In less conventional relationships, these obliging patterns are often less stereotyped.
Obliging may be linked to codependence. In codependent relationships, what one person does, thinks, or feels is dependent on what someone else does, thinks, or feels. Codependent relationships often result from a person growing up in an alcoholic or abusive family, or in any family in which power differences are very obvious. The extreme escalation of the alcoholic or abusive person causes the spouse or child to become hypervigilant, to tune in with exquisite attention to the moods, needs, feelings, and predicted behavior of a powerful other. Ultimately, vigilant persons in such a situation tend to not know what they think, feel, or need, except to feel safe. One of the hardest questions a counselor asks many women and some men is, “What are you feeling?” For the person who has lived with a system of obliging or codependence, the answer is usually, “I don’t know.”
Obliging responses are often seen as being kind, being responsive to the partner, or as promoting calm. Certainly it is true that not every issue needs to be addressed, and obliging can be a helpful part of anyone’s repertoire. At the same time, obliging can reflect a position of “I have no choice.” That power imbalance, as we have discovered, harms ongoing relationships. As we become more sensitized to obliging moves, we should be able to expand our understanding of them and their role in conflict events. If you care about the long-term relationship, want to resolve a conflict to accomplish an important task, and can avoid reactivity, obliging can help create goodwill.
 Integrating

Collaborative processes unleash this catalytic power and mobilize joint action among the stakeholders.
—Barbara Gray, Collaborating: Finding Common Ground for Multiparty Problems
Integrating, or collaborating, demands the most constructive, engaged engagement of any of the conflict styles. Integrating shows a high level of concern for one’s own goals, the goals of others, the successful solution of the problem, and the enhancement of the relationship. Note that integrating, unlike compromise, involves not a moderate level of concern for goals but a high level of concern for them. Integrating is an invitation to all others so you can reach a joint resolution.
A collaborative conflict does not conclude until both parties are reasonably satisfied and can jointly support a solution. Relationships are better, not worse, than when the conflict began. No one person ends up feeling run over or overpowered. The style is cooperative, effective, and focused on team effort, partnership, or shared personal goals. It is also sometimes called mutual problem solving. Integrating is the style that calls on all your best communication skills.
Page 175
Integrating involves making descriptive and disclosing statements and soliciting reactions from the other party. You make concessions when necessary and accept responsibility for your part in the conflict. Integrating does not mean taking total responsibility, such as saying, “It’s all my fault. I shouldn’t have gotten angry.” Rather, integrating is a struggle with others to find mutually agreeable solutions. Parties engage at an exploratory, problem-solving level rather than avoiding or destroying each other. Integrating is the search for a new way.
Integrating is characterized by statements such as “When I get in conflict with someone, I try to work creatively with them to find new options” or “I like to assert myself, and I also like to cooperate with others.” Integrating differs from compromise because in compromise, the parties look for an easy intermediate position that partially satisfies them both, whereas in integrating, the parties work creatively to find new solutions that will maximize goals for them both.
Application 5.7

Salary, Public Regard, and Secret Agreements

Both Lillian and Greg had been working in a hospital, Lillian as the vice president for financial affairs and Greg as a program director for financial campaigns. Both Lillian and Greg reported directly to the CFO, who retired. Both applied for his job, but were disappointed when someone from another state was hired. However, both Lillian, the VP, and Greg came to like and respect Karen, the new CFO. Lillian had the higher position, although Greg also reported to the CFO, not to Lillian. The conflict arose when time for pay raises and performance reviews came around. Karen told Greg that she valued him, and did not want to lose him. He had been looking for another job. So she promoted him to “vice president for financial growth,” with a salary increase slightly above Lillianʼs. Lillian retained her position as vice president.
What were they thinking and feeling?
Karen: I am so new here that I donʼt want to train another campaign director. Greg knows everyone in town. When he told me he was thinking of going back to his previous hospital as CFO, I believed him. He is a competitive, aggressive person who wants to be at the top. I couldnʼt afford to lose him. However, I donʼt quite trust him. He is doing a lot of public forums where he says he speaks for the hospital, without checking with me. He is a lone ranger. And now I have alienated Lillian who, while quiet, is really the heart and soul of this office. She has years of institutional history and everyone trusts her. She is willing to do the hard, daily work of financial oversight. I should not have caved in to Gregʼs request without talking it over with Lillian and my president. I can see that I put her in a one-down position with Greg. Iʼm going to have to fix this, and quick. She could easily retire early and then weʼd all lose.
Lillian: I am sure Karen does not know how much Greg upstages me. He never includes me in the conversation when we are with higher-ups or big donors. He treats me like the secretary. I didnʼt mind so much, because I know Karen values me and after all, I was second to her. Now she has effectively raised Greg above me, although I donʼt have to report to him. And I heard from someone I trust that he wants Karenʼs job. I am upset, but more with Greg than Karen. Karen, I think, got bullied, and Iʼm paying the price. Itʼs not OK with me. We need to talk. I do not want to retire, but I will never put myself in the position to report to Greg.
Greg: I am pleased that Karen sees my worth. I have brought a lot of money to the hospital, and Iʼm developing a good public presence. I donʼt respect Lillianʼs unassuming style. She lets a lot of opportunities go by without telling donors what we need. Sheʼs more of an accountant than a vice president. I donʼt like it that Karen goes to her for everything. I really dislike the team meetings when nothing gets done. Karenʼs always talking about a “team plan,” but I just want to be left alone to make connections with donors and then let the president figure out what the priorities are. I do fine on my own.
Page 176
Of the following options, pick the one that you think has the best chance of getting all three people to come up with a collaborative (win–win) solution. Then role-play your preferred option with all three people.
Option 1. Karen calls a meeting with Greg and Lillian and says that she has made a mistake in raising Greg without including Lillian. She calls for a team decision about how to rectify the relationship, content, identity, and process issues.
Option 2. Karen talks with Greg and Lillian separately, asking Greg to change some of his public behavior, and telling Lillian that Karen made a mistake and wants to brainstorm how to resolve the issue.
Option 3. Karen calls a meeting with the president and Lillian and Greg and explains that Greg is extremely valuable to the team, but no more so than Lillian, so she is going to raise Lillianʼs salary to Gregʼs level. She asks them to collaborate more in public.
Option 4. None of the above. Develop a plan that you think might work, including beginning language, based on what the three parties think and feel. The object is a collaborative outcome.
Research on the effect of an integrating style consistently demonstrates that when one learns how to use it, integrating is a successful tool for conflict management (Kuhn and Poole 2000). Integrating results in joint benefits and provides a constructive response to the conflict. Collaborative styles in a variety of contexts result in better decisions and greater satisfaction with partners (Gayle-Hackett 1989b; Pruitt 1981; Tutzauer and Roloff 1988; Wall and Galanes 1986). Cooperative styles allow conflict parties to find mutually agreeable solutions, whether the conflict occurs in an intimate or work situation.
The following box summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of integrating.
Page 177
Integrating
advantages

Integrating works well to find a collaborative solution that will satisfy all parties. It generates new ideas, shows respect for the other parties, and gains commitment to the solution from everyone. Because integrating incorporates the feelings of the concerned parties, they both feel the solutions are reality based. Integrating is a high-energy style that fits people in long-term, committed relationships, whether personal or professional. Integrating actively affirms the importance of relationship and content goals and thus builds a team or partnership approach to conflict management. When integrating works, it prevents one from using destructive means such as violence. It demonstrates to the parties that conflict can be productive.
example:

Anne, an intern at a hospital, has been given a “mission impossible” that requires that she diagnose and keep charts on patients under the supervision of four different doctors. Her fellow interns work collaboratively to relieve her of some of the work. They want to demonstrate the need for more reasonable assignments, support Anne as a friend, and avoid being assigned Anneʼs work if she gets sick or resigns.
disadvantages

As with any style, if integrating is the only style used, one can become imprisoned in it. If investment in the relationship or issue is low, integrating may not be worth the time and energy consumed. Further, people who are more verbally skilled than others can use integrating in manipulative ways, which results in a continued power discrepancy between the parties. For example, if one party uses integrating, that person may accuse the other of being uncaring by choosing a different style, such as avoidance. Often, high-power persons use pseudo-integrating to maintain the power imbalance. Pseudo-integrating is when you say all the right things, but ultimately you always gain at the otherʼs expense.
example:

Members of a small group in a communication class are under time pressure to finish their project, due in 1 week. They overuse collaborative techniques such as consensus building, brainstorming, paraphrasing, and bringing out silent members. Quickly breaking up into subgroups would better serve the individual and relational goals of the group, but the group clings to a time-consuming method of making decisions long after they should have adapted their style to meet the deadline.
When you integrate, you induce, or persuade, the other party to cooperate in finding a mutually favorable resolution to the conflict. You have a “mutual versus individual” orientation. Integrating involves both parties working together for solutions that not only end the conflict but also maximize the gains for both parties. Collaborative tactics also have been labeled “prosocial” (Roloff 2009). The goals of the individuals and the relationship as a whole are paramount.
Some sample integrative statements are:
Page 178
“I want to make sure this works for the two of us.”
“Yes, I know you would like to flip a coin, but let’s chat some more and come up with a more creative solution.”
“Tell me again why this solution will or will not work for you.”
“I see you are upset, tell me what you need so we can move on.”
“Let’s not decide right away, but come together this afternoon and figure out a solution that will work for both of us.”
“You are an important part of our team and I’d like to hear your preferences before we decide.”
“Let’s each lay out our concerns and then figure out how to address them.”
Some other guidelines are:
Describe without interpretation. Describe what you feel, see, hear, touch, and smell instead of your guesses about the behavior.
Example: “You’re so quiet. Ever since I said I didn’t want to go out tonight and would rather stay home and read, you haven’t spoken to me,” not “You never understand when I want to spend some time alone!”
Focus on what is, instead of what should be.
Example: “You look angry. Are you?” not “You shouldn’t be angry just because I want to stay home.”
Describe your own experience instead of attributing things to the other person.
Example: “I’m finding myself not wanting to bring up any ideas because I’m afraid you will ignore them,” not “You are getting more critical all the time.”
Integrative, or collaborative, tactics are very different from dominating tactics. A dominating tactic assumes that the size of the pie is finite; therefore, one’s tactics are designed to maximize gains for oneself and losses for the other. Integrative tactics, however, assume that the size of the pie can be increased by working with the other party. Both can leave the conflict with something they value.
Some people experience only avoidant or dominating attitudes toward conflict and have a difficult time visualizing an integrative approach. If each time you have conflict you immediately say to your conflict partner, “You are wrong,” you are likely to receive a dominating response in return. Integrating calls for a willingness to move with rather than against the other—a willingness to explore and struggle precisely when you may not feel like it. You do not give up your self-interest; you integrate it with the other’s self-interest to reach agreement.
You do not have to like the other party, but you do have to communicate respect. Integrating does require “we” language rather than “I” language. Because parties work together for mutually desirable outcomes and protect their own as well as each other’s interests, many times respect and caring develop as by-products of the collaborative effort. One makes disclosing statements by saying such things as “I am having trouble tracking this issue” or otherwise reporting one’s feelings while in the conflict. When you state your feelings, of course you will use I language, since you know how you feel. Remember that “I feel that you do not understand this issue” is not a feeling statement, but a judgment. You can also solicit disclosure from the other party by saying, “What makes you upset when I bring up the summer plans?” One can also make qualifying statements and solicit criticism as ways to move the conflict toward integrating.
Page 179
The final three categories of integrative tactics, classified as conciliatory remarks, are (1) supportive remarks (“I can see why that is difficult—we have all been ganging up on you.”); (2) concessions (“OK, I agree I need to find new ways to deal with this problem.”); and (3) acceptance of responsibility (“Yes, I have been acting uncooperatively lately.”). All conciliatory remarks acknowledge one’s own role in the conflict and offer an “olive branch” of hope and reconciliation to the other, paving the way to successful management of the conflict. All of the integrative tactics move the conflict into a third dimension where partners neither avoid nor blame but grapple with the conflict as a joint problem to be solved.
Collaborative, or integrative, tactics are associated with successful conflict management. Popular prescriptions for conflict management specify that one should work with the partner to establish mutual gain and to preserve the relationship and should engage in neither avoidance nor verbal aggressiveness but try to find mutual solutions to the problems (Fisher and Shapiro 2005).
 Cautions About Styles

Because conflict styles are generating so much research, some cautions are in order. As noted previously, culture often makes a difference. If the cultural studies could be grouped according to the degree of individualism and collectivism in each culture that would be helpful.3 One study, however, suggests, “Overall the pattern of the five conflict modes did not vary greatly across countries or in comparison to the U.S. Norm Sample” (Herk et al. 2011, p. 1).4
Regardless of the cultural context, one consistent and serious limitation to the studies is the focus on self-reports.5 Your perception of conflict style depends on whether you are rating yourself or others are rating you. In some research and workshops, two patterns emerge:
People most often see themselves as trying to solve the problem (using integrative styles) (McCready et al. 1996).
People most often see others using controlling or aggressive styles.
Most of us see ourselves as trying to solve the conflict, whereas the other obstructs or interferes. In one workshop, participants, all who had disputes with someone else in the room, filled out the instrument as you did earlier in this chapter on my styles and the other’s styles. When the results were tallied, an interesting result emerged. Almost all participants said, “I integrated and the other dominated.” Two earlier studies found that managers see themselves as cooperative and others as competitive, demanding, or refusing (Thomas and Pondy 1977).
Page 180
Self-reports carry a social desirability bias (giving answers that “look good”). One person’s “narrative” about the conflict will probably not match that of the other person. In conflict, we tend to see ourselves in a positive light and others in a negative light. Unfortunately, most research on styles still uses self-reports, assuming they tell us what “style” someone actually used. At a minimum, studies need to look at the following:
Person A—my styles, person B’s styles
Person B—my styles, person A’s styles
Without such joint data, any conclusions about style are problematic.
The relational context often triggers an idiosyncratic style (Doucet, Poitras, and Chenevert 2009). Look at this list. Do you use the same style in all these relationships?
Best Friend
Mother/Father
Stepparent
Roommate
Brother or sister (or both)
President of student body
Uncle or aunt
Former romantic partner
Current romantic partner
Supervisor at work
Peers at work
Classmate you like
Classmate you dislike
Classroom instructor
Childhood friend
New friend
Whether the rater is you or the other, many people do not use a consistent style across a variety of relationships. One example is Eric, a college debater, who uses different styles in different contexts. When he is in public, he competes every chance he gets. He loves to match wits with others, push hard for what he wants, and win arguments. He is a good-humored and driven young man in public situations. Yet in private with his wife, he avoids conflict as though it were a dreaded disease. When Joan brings up conflicting issues, Eric either avoids or completely obliges her—he cannot stand conflict within an intimate relationship. Yet if Eric was to fill out a widely used style instrument, he would give a different answer depending on the relational context. But since a significant number of people adapt to different situations with different styles, to give them a single label, such as a “compromiser,” is a gross oversimplification.
Research takes a “snapshot” of conflict styles, asking you what you did in a relationship. For many people, the style changes across time in a given relationship. Some people develop preferred sequences of styles; for example, one may begin a conflict by avoiding, then move to dominating, and then finally integrate with the other party. The accurate assessment of one’s conflict style should measure change over time. The following chart illustrates predominant styles with fluctuations across time. Note the variability within the styles used by the two people, both of whom predominantly avoid conflict.
Page 181
Time 1	Time 2	Time 3	Time 4	Time 5	Time 6	Time 7	Time 8	Time 9
Person A:	avoiding	avoiding	dominating	avoiding	avoiding	avoiding	dominating	avoiding	avoiding
Person B:	avoiding	avoiding	obliging	avoiding	avoiding	avoiding	obliging	avoiding	avoiding
Both would score as “avoiders” on a general style measure, yet over time, each one demonstrates distinctly different patterns. In ongoing relationships, multiple episodes span time, which a “snapshot” will not capture (Speakman and Ryals 2010).
Like Jen above, each of us develops a conflict style narrative based on our self-perception. Jen sees herself as an avoider who only once dominated, but don’t you wonder how her ex-husband’s narrative about her would diverge? He might say, “Oh, she didn’t avoid, she was just a weak compromiser” or her “true self ” came out when she exploded. Furthermore, Jen may be different in her next serious relationship. Similarly, a young man who is always dominating learns from his romantic partner how to collaborate. Styles change with learning. One who avoids conflict learns through trial and error to engage in the conflict earlier, thus changing her predominant mode. One can change a preferred conflict style, especially if the old style ceases to work well.
Your style is often triggered by your perception of the other’s choices. The other’s style influences the choices we make. For example, in Ellen’s first marriage, she developed the pattern of occasionally throwing dishes when she was intensely angry. Her first husband would flee the house. A few years later, after she had married Mick, they got into an argument. Ellen threw a dish at Mick, who promptly went to the kitchen, picked up most of the available dishes on the counter, smashed them on the floor, and said, firmly, “Well, if we are going to break dishes, let’s do it!” Ellen immediately burst into tears. She wanted a partner who would stay and work out the problem instead of leaving the scene. Neither has thrown a dish since.
Conflict styles can provide good beginning point for analysis. Knowing your perception of self and other and the other’s perception of self and of you gives you valuable insight into what fuels the ongoing conflict. In a close relationship, what is the best way to find out how your friend, partner, or family member perceives you? Ask them.
 Beyond Styles: Violence

Each of the five styles presented so far in this chapter has a place in conflict management, except the subset of domination, verbal aggressiveness, and verbal abuse. As we have seen, verbal violence (and, for that matter, violence generally) leads to negative outcomes. It violates the core principles of good communication and, frankly, isn’t very mindful. Violence rests on a win–lose approach to conflict.
Violence occurs when conflict interactions move beyond threats, verbal abuse, and verbal aggressiveness. A working definition of violence is “an act carried out with the intention or perceived intention of causing physical pain or injury to another person” (Gelles and Cornell 1990, 22). In conflict terms, violent behavior is an attempt to force one’s will on the other—to get him or her to stop doing something or to start doing something. Clearly, it is a one-sided tactic designed to force the other to do one’s bidding. Violence substitutes physical threats for verbal persuasion. Violence occurs in the home, on dates, and in the workplace. Specifying the details of violence, the two most researched scales are CTS and CTS2 (Straus et al. 1996). The two versions, CTS and CTS2, use items on negotiation, psychological aggression, physical assault, sexual coercion, and injury. Some sample items from the two scales are6:
Page 182
Threw something at my partner that could hurt.
Twisted my partner’s arm or hair.
Pushed or shoved my partner.
Had a broken bone from a fight with my partner.
Used force like hitting, holding down, or using a weapon to make my partner have sex.
Grabbed my partner.
Used a knife or gun on my partner.
Punched or hit my partner with something that could hurt.
Choked my partner.
Slammed my partner against a wall.
Beat up my partner.
Kicked my partner.
First responders and family violence counselors now can use excellent tools to help them quickly assess the potential lethality of the situation in which they intervene. The Karolinska Violence Scale (2010) provides an interview guide to help assess the potential for continuing violent behavior when a person has entered the social service or criminal justice system. The State of Maryland has developed a Lethality Assessment Program that first responders may use to quickly decide how dangerous an intimate partner or family situation might be, so the people involved can be referred for further services or apprehended (www.mnadv.org, Maryland Network Against Domestic Violence). The field of IPV risk assessment is a rapidly growing area of inquiry and application. Administration of the assessment devices and interpretation of their predictive validity continue to be refined by researchers (Messing and Thaller 2013).
Violence remains tragically pervasive, even though the seriousness of such violence, especially domestic violence, continues to come into question too frequently, even being termed “ordinary decent domestic violence” by a judge in one study (Haughton et al. 2015). Ponder for a moment these rates:
In the United States, almost 20% of people reported experiencing a violent episode in the prior year of their romantic relationship (Marshall 1994), and more than 4 million women each year are physically harmed by their husbands, boyfriends, or other intimate partners. Similarly, in Australia more than 20% of couples have experienced violence (Halford, Farrugia, Lizzio, and Wilson 2009).7
Premarital violence is a serious social problem that affects more than 30% of the young people in the United States who date (Buttell and Carney 2006; Sugarman and Hotaling 1989).
In unhappy marriages, 71% of the couples reported physical aggression in the prior year (Vivian and Langhinrichsen-Rohling 1994).
Men commit about 13 million violent crimes each year, with only half being simple assaults, whereas women commit about 2.1 million violent crimes a year, with three-quarters being simple assaults (Buttel and Carney 2006). Male violence carries much more risk of danger and lethality than female violence.
Page 183
In another study of dating relationships, 23% of students reported being pushed, grabbed, or shoved by their dating partner (Deal and Wampler 1986). Studies of college students have indicated that rates of physical aggression against a current mate are between 20% and 35%, with all forms of physical assault decreasing dramatically with age. The most common forms of physical aggression practiced by both men and women were pushing, shoving, and slapping (O’Leary et al. 1989). Additionally, 16.3 out of 1,000 children were reported to have been abused and/or neglected, and in 16% of homes, some kind of violence between spouses had occurred in the year prior to the survey (Gelles and Cornell 1990).
In summary, most researchers conclude that violence is indeed common in American families, and current rates of violence are updated each year. Further, “These incidents of violence are not isolated attacks nor are they just pushes and shoves. In many families, violence is patterned and regular and often results in broken bones and sutured cuts” (192). Violence spans all social and economic boundaries, though it is more prevalent in families with low income, low educational achievement, and low-status employment.8
Patterns of Violence

The following are some tenets of violence, based on research (adapted from Bartholomew and Cobb 2011):
Tenet 1: Physical Aggression Is Almost Always Preceded by Verbal Aggression

Small, insignificant acts lead to verbal sparring, which then escalates into physical aggression or abuse. For instance, you burn the toast, your spouse screams at you, “Why can’t you even do simple things right?” You shout back, “So what makes you think you are so high and mighty?” and the cycle continues unabated with the two of you shoving each other around the kitchen. The spiral of destruction continues until the physically stronger one, usually the man, gets control. The important feature here is that the physical abuse does not just arise out of nowhere—it follows hostile, dominating verbal acts (Evans 1992; Lloyd and Emery 1994). The partners engage in an “aggression ritual” that ends in violence (Harris, Gergen, and Lannamann 1986).
Page 184
Tenet 2: Intimate Violence Is Usually Reciprocal—Both Participate

Aggression and violence are reciprocal—once one partner engages in violence, the other is likely to respond in kind. In intimate male–female relationships, the woman is more likely than the man to engage in violent low-power tactics: The woman is 14 times more likely than the man to throw something and 15 times more likely than the man to slap (Stets and Henderson 1991). However, 40% of all women who are murdered are killed by someone close to them. Major differences in male and female violence show up in the seriousness and the effects of violence. There is no question that women are seriously victimized much more often than are men. Both participants are likely to report being both victims and perpetrators of physical aggression; 85% of couples report that the aggression is bidirectional (Vivian and Langhinrichsen-Rohling 1994). These statistics suggest there is an attack–counterattack sequence to the majority of violent episodes. Once violence begins, both people tend to participate—it is a dyadic, interactive event.
Tenet 3: Women and Children Suffer Many More Injuries

Violence, regardless of the cycle of interaction leading up to it, damages women and children more than men. Advocates for battered women point out ongoing patterns for the women they assist. These include forms of coercion such as verbal abuse, threats, psychological manipulation, sexual coercion, and control of money and physical freedom. Additionally, many women learn not to confront, and remain unskilled in effective verbal defense. Many women try to placate rather than leave the scene. Socialization of women that teaches them to be forgiving also leads to women staying in abusive relationships.
All you have to do is volunteer at a battered women’s shelter or read in the newspaper about child abuse to see who loses. As Gelles (1981) says, “When men hit women and women hit men, the real victims are almost certainly going to be the women” (128). Even when women use weapons as a way to gain control, they are still injured more often (Felson 1996). Throughout history, women have been the victims of violence.
Tenet 4: Victims of Abuse Are in a No-Win Situation

Once the cycle of abuse begins, the victim of the abuse has few good options (Lloyd and Emery 1994). For example, it is fruitless to try to use aggression against a stronger and more violent person. Yet, on another level, it is extraordinarily difficult to leave because the perpetrator is trying to control all the victim’s actions. The complexity of abusive relationships is evidenced by the fact that nearly 40% of victims of dating violence continue their relationships and that most women who seek help from a battered women’s shelter return to their spouses (Bartholomew and Cobb 2011; Sugarman and Hotaling 1989). Many women go back to abusive situations because with children they cannot make a living. Many women feel guilty about the failure of the relationship and go back, believing the abuser’s promises to change. One study documented that 70% of fathers who sought custody of their children were successful, so many women, especially poor women, are afraid of losing their children if they stay away (Marano 1996). Tragically, abusers often escalate their control tactics when victims try to leave. More domestic abuse victims are killed when they try to leave than at any other time. It is difficult for women with children to flee when they are so dependent on the very person who is violent with them.
Tenet 5: Perpetrators and Victims Have Discrepant Narratives About Violence (Bartholomew and Cobb 2011; Moffitt et al. 1997)

One of the reasons that it is so difficult to decrease violence is that perpetrators of violent acts see their behavior as something “that could not be helped or as due to external, mitigating circumstances. Thus, they may cast themselves as unjustly persecuted for a minor, unavoidable, or nonexistent offense” (Baumeister, Stillwell, and Wotman 1990, 1003). One provocative study asked the participants to recall situations where they were perpetrators of violence and then write about the events. They also were asked to recall situations where they were victims and reflect on those events. What emerged was that “perpetrators apparently see the incident as a brief, uncharacteristic episode that has little or no relation to present circumstances whereas victims apparently continue to see harmful consequences and to feel lasting grievances” (1001). The discrepancies in accounts of violence extend to the underreporting of violence. Husbands are more likely than wives to minimize and deny their violence (Bartholomew and Cobb 2011; Browning and Dotton 1986). Furthermore, husbands are more likely than wives to count choking, punching, and beating someone up as self-defense rather than violence (Brygger and Edleson 1984), but what abusers often report as “self-defense” is in reality violent retaliation.
Page 185
Even though violence from women to men occurs (Ridley and Feldman 2003), it is far less common. In any event, the accounts of the abuser and victim will be discrepant.
Explanations for Violence

Why does violence occur in personal relationships? One explanation is that violent responses to conflict are learned—those who experience violence have often experienced it before, having witnessed it in their family of origin or in previous relationships (Yexley and Borowsky 2002). Perpetrators of violence were often victims of violence in their childhood and in their earlier relationships. Yet, saying that “violence is passed on” is not a totally satisfying answer. We need to know much more about people who do not continue the patterns. Why do some people who are exposed to violence and aggression in childhood stop these patterns in adulthood (Lenton 1995a, 1995b)? Patricia, for example, suffered both verbal and physical abuse at the hand of her father. He said and did terrible things to her when she was a child, and she ran away from home at age 17. Yet, in raising her children, she did not once verbally or physically abuse them. We need much more research on resilient people like this who break the intergenerational transmission of aggression. Similarly, what about people in families and romantic relationships who stop escalating sequences of verbal aggression that might lead to violence? And, at the same time, why do some people who were not previously exposed to violence and aggression develop violent and aggressive behaviors?
A second explanation for violence centers on the elements of a patriarchal culture that insists the man is always right. The more discrepant the power between the husband and the wife, the greater the violence (Kim and Emery 2003). In “asymmetric power structures” (husband-dominant or wife-dominant marriages), there is “a much greater risk of violence than when conflict occurs among the equalitarian couples” (Coleman and Straus 1986, 152). When the power is “asymmetric,” conflict episodes more often trigger violence. Extreme dependency leads to tolerance of violence. Research shows multiple factors leading to abuse and that patriarchal explanations, while part of the picture, are too simplistic (Bell and Forde 1999; Buttell and Carney 2006; Greene and Bogo 2002). For example, incidences of violence are higher in the United States than Hong Kong—seen as a patriarchal culture as well (Kam and Bond 2008).
A third explanation for violent tactics is that violence is the result of lack of communication skills in a situation of powerlessness. Physically aggressive wives and husbands display rigid communication patterns, automatically responding in kind to their partner rather than with an alternative response (Rosen 1996). If you can effectively argue (without being verbally aggressive), then you have a sense of power and impact. If you feel that you can have an impact on your spouse, there is no need to resort to physical aggression, even in the heat of conflict. Yet, there are also people who are both verbally skillful and physically violent.
Page 186
Clearly, no one explanation can account for violence. For example, why does a strong belief in pacifism correlate to fewer violent behaviors for Quaker women but not for Quaker men (Brutz and Allen 1986)? Why do surveys indicate that men are more often the recipients of violence than women? Is it because males are more likely to see any violence as a violation and report it? And why do people in heterosexual marriages with a lot of physical aggression often not see it as a problem (Vivian and Langhinrichsen-Rohling 1994)?
Regardless of one’s explanation of violence, it is past time for us to come together to take a firm stand on it. We desperately need to approach violence from a variety of ­platforms—in the home, schools, in places of worship, and in the workplace. We need programs to teach us how to stop violence in all contexts and give assistance to both perpetrators and victims so the cycles of destruction can be stopped.
 Interaction Dynamics

We cannot understand conflict dynamics by examining individual styles in isolation. The interlocking interaction of two or more people determines the outcome of the conflict. No matter how hard one person tries to resolve a conflict, the outcome will not be constructive unless the other person is involved in working things out, too. Figure 5.3 shows two very different outcomes of conflict, even though Michael uses exactly the same tactics throughout. In one case, the conflict escalates between the two participants. In the other, Janet’s alternative tactics reduce the conflict. The outcome is the joint product of both choices, not the result of some inherent personality trait of either participant.

Figure 5.3 Tactics in an Interaction Context
In conflict interactions people tend to choose their tactics and styles based on the view of the other’s intent and actions. Analysis must shift from the individual to the relationship level, viewing conflict preferences as resulting from a system of interlocking behaviors rather than as a function of personality. Relational variables (e.g., whom you interact with, how congruent your perceptions are with those of the other party, what intent you think the other party has, and the mirroring of each other’s responses) explain conflict style choices better than personality. In organizations, when a manager is perceived to use an integrating style, subordinates are less likely to use threats to resign, and more likely to use verbal engagement for dissent. When a manager’s style is perceived to be dominating, subordinates are more likely to threaten to resign, to go around the manager, and to repeat demands (Redmond, Jameson, and Bender 2016).
Even though each conflict interaction is unique, two patterns of interlocking behaviors are worthy of note: (1) complementary patterns and (2) symmetrical patterns.
Complementary patterns are tactics or styles that are different from one another but also mutually reinforcing. For example, if one person tries to engage and talk about the conflict and the other avoids, each one’s moves reinforce those of the other. The engager begins to think, “If I don’t force the issue, he will never talk to me,” while the avoider thinks, “If she would just leave me alone, it would be all right.” The more she engages, the more he avoids; the more he avoids, the more she engages; and they produce a “communication spiral” in which both parties magnify their chosen response.
Such complementary patterns occur in many contexts. In business settings, for example, supervisors and subordinates use different styles, and in personal relationships, one person is often conciliatory and the other coercive. In intimate relationships that are unsatisfactory, partners may experiment with different styles, trying to find an interaction pattern that will improve the relationship.
Page 187
Two people can engage in complementary interactions that do not lead to serious relationship difficulties. For example, 9-year-old Carina, when confronted by her father about being responsible, says, “Who cares?” (with a giggle). But, if the patterns persist for years, they can keep the two parties in recurring conflict.
Symmetrical sequences occur in conflicts when the participants’ tactics mirror one another—both parties escalating, for example. One type of symmetrical pattern occurs when the parties both avoid a conflict, refuse to engage in the conflict overtly, and create a devitalized spiral. As a result, the relationship loses vitality and the partners become so independent of each other that the relationship withers away. Gottman (1982) noted that there is a “chaining” of identical tactics in distressed marriages. Distressed spouses might get stuck in cycles of competitive tactics. For example, a sequence might occur as follows:
Page 188
Husband: threat: “Don’t even think of walking away from me when I’m talking.”
  Wife: counter-threat: “I’ll walk away, and I’ll walk right out of the marriage if I do. You can’t stop me.”
Husband: intensified threat: “Try it, and see how you get to work without a car. It’s in my name, so you don’t have a car!”
  Wife: intensified counter-threat: “And you don’t have children. We’re history!”
People often match their spouses’ competitive tactics with an increase in their own. Such escalatory spirals lead the couple into irresolvable conflicts. In organizations, what starts as an “attack-defend” pattern evolves into symmetrical “attack-attack” patterns, with each party trying to one-up the other (Putnam and Jones 1982b). These patterns have been characterized in the following ways:
attack–attack
retaliatory chaining
negative reciprocity
cross-complaining
threat–counterthreat
round-robin attacks
escalatory spirals
Conflict styles are best seen in the context of the relationship. Based on available research, the following conclusions are warranted:
If the conflict parties both want to avoid the conflict and, as a norm, do not generally work through conflicts, joint avoidance can be functional (Pike and Sillars 1985).
Once a conflict is engaged, dissatisfaction can be caused by either fight-flight or threat-threat patterns. Either the complementary pattern or the symmetrical pattern can be dysfunctional for the parties, especially when they get rigidly locked into habitual tactics and styles.
Once engagement has occurred, the conflict is best managed by moving to collaborative/integrative tactics (Pike and Sillars 1985). One useful sequence is (a) the agenda-building phase, (b) the arguing phase, and (c) the final, integrative negotiation phase (Gottman, Notarius, Gonso, and Markman 1976).
In summary, to preserve a good relationship while pursuing a goal that appears incompatible with that of the other person, integrative tactics work best. You may begin the conflict by avoiding, obliging, compromising, or dominating, but at some point collaborative engagement is usually necessary. Competent communicators are those who use constructive, prosocial, collaborative tactics at some stage of the conflict (Cupach 1982). As Schuetz (1978) says, “In situations of conflict, as in other communicative events, the competent communicator engages in cooperative interaction that permits both persons (factions) involved to achieve their goals” (10).
Family researchers have clearly demonstrated the link between integrating and relationship satisfaction (Gottman 1994; Noller, Feeney, Bonnell, and Callan 1994). Collaborative tactics involve supporting a positive, autonomous identity for the other while working toward your own goals. Such multiple demands, although difficult to master, lead to productive results for all parties, for in the end you are working with rather than against the other for mutual integrative gains.
Page 189
Whatever communication moves you make, the basic question is whether those choices lead to the effective management of the conflict over time. No one set of choices at any point will guarantee productive conflict, but integrative tactics at least set the stage for the containment and management of the conflict if both parties move toward a problem-solving perspective. When in doubt, collaborate.
 Flexibility Creates Constructive Conflict

Being Stuck

People often stay frozen into a conflict style rather than developing style flexibility. Each time they are in a conflict, they make the same choices. The work associate who always avoids any conflict, smoothes over everyone’s feelings, and habitually refuses to talk about the difficulties between her and others, is frozen in a particular style. Individual lack of adaptation can occur in many forms. For example, people might always avoid conflict until a situation heats up, at which point they engage in violent behavior. The pattern is self-sealing and difficult to alter. The person who competes on the job and is unable to relax off the job is just as stuck as the person who is unable to openly admit that conflict exists. People who are inflexible in their style selection are often unaware that their choice of style is an important contributor to the conflict.
People often get stuck in behaviors from their “golden age.” The golden age is that period in which you felt best about yourself and from which you possibly still draw many positive feelings. The 45-year-old history teacher who fondly recalls participating in high school athletics might operate from the rule that “the way to handle conflict is to get out there and give it everything you’ve got, fight to win, and never let anything keep you from your goal.” This rule probably worked beautifully in a football game, but it may cause real havoc if the principal does not want to work with aggressive teachers and recommends this teacher’s transfer to another school.
Often, people are stuck in a personal style because of early family experiences and gender identity (Neff and Harter 2002). Young girls may have been taught to smooth others’ feelings and not “make waves.” If you were raised with such prescriptions and bring them to a conflict situation, you will accommodate the other and fail to assert your own desires. In the following excerpt, Karen details some of the disadvantages of this particular lack of flexibility:
As a child, I was forbidden to “talk back.” As a result, I stifled all my replies until I was of sufficient age to walk out and did so. That was fifteen years ago—I have never been back . . . Thus, my strategy has been one of avoidance of a conflict to which I can see no resolution. Because I was raised by my father and stepmother, I scarcely knew my mother. When I was seventeen, I went to live with her. She wanted a mother-daughter relationship to which I could not respond. Legally bound to her, my attempts at confrontation ended in failure. Once again I walked out—this time into marriage. After seven years of marriage and abortive attempts at communication, I again walked out—this time with two children.
Likewise, many men are taught to compete regardless of the situation, learning that obliging, compromising, and integrating are all signs of weakness. Although a competitive style might be appropriate for certain business situations where everyone understands the tacit rules, dominating as your only response in an intimate relationship may destroy it. Gender conditioning, whatever its particular form, is just one kind of learning that helps keep people stuck in conflict styles that may not work in certain situations.
Page 190
Are You Stuck?

How can you tell if you are stuck in a conflict style? Use the following diagnostic aid to determine if you are stuck in a style that does not work well for you:
Does your current conflict response feel like the only natural one? For example, if your friends or family members suggest that you “might try talking it through” rather than repetitively escalating conflict, do such new options seem alien and almost impossible for you to enact? When stuck, “do what comes unnaturally!”
Does your conflict style remain constant across a number of conflicts that have similar characteristics? For example, in every conflict, do you accommodate others regardless of the issues at hand or your relationship with the others involved?
Do you have a set of responses that follow a preset pattern? For instance, do you “go for the jugular” then back off and accommodate the other because you fear you have made a “scene”? If you follow regular cycles of behavior, whatever the particulars, you may be stuck.
Do others seem to do the same thing with you? If different people engage in similar behavior with you, you may be doing something that triggers their response. For instance, has it been your experience that in conflicts, others are always dominating? If so, their behavior may be a reaction to a dominating posture that you take toward conflict. If you were more conciliatory, integrative, or obliging, others might not feel the need to respond competitively to you.
Do you carry a label that is used to describe you? If you grew up as “our little fireball,” you may not have learned how to collaborate. If you are referred to as a “powerhouse,” a “mover and a shaker,” or “a bulldog,” your conflict style might be overly inflexible. If you’re known as “the judge,” “the warrior,” or “the dictator,” you probably have an overly rigid style. Labels, although they often hurt and overgeneralize, may carry embedded grains of truth.
Application 5.8

Your Responses

Answer the above five questions, privately first, then with your small group. What did you learn? Is there anything you want to change about your style across various contexts? Maybe itʼs time for a change.
Individuals who can change and adapt are more likely to be effective conflict participants, accomplishing private and group goals better than people who avoid change. Hart and Burks (1972) discuss the concept of rhetorical sensitivity, the idea that people change their communication style based on the demands of different situations. The following five communication characteristics describe people who are rhetorically sensitive:
Page 191
They are comfortable altering their roles in response to the behaviors of others.
They avoid stylizing their communication behavior, so they are able to adapt.
They develop skills to deal with different audiences and are able to withstand the pressure and ambiguity of constant adaptation.
They are able to monitor talk with others to make it purposive rather than expressive. They speak not so much to “spill their guts” as to solve problems.
They adapt and alter behaviors in a rational and orderly way.
In other words, effective communicators adapt to others. They avoid getting “stuck” in certain conflict styles.
If you have a repertoire of styles, it prompts you to see others in a different, more objective light. When we see we make choices depending on circumstances, we then can see others doing the same thing. We are far less likely to judge the behavior of others automatically as having bad intent, being childish, or being improper.
Another reason for having a repertoire of conflict styles is many styles were developed from rules for children. Although it may be appropriate to “respect your elders” when you are 8 years old, overgeneralizing that rule to include avoiding conflict with respected elders when you are an adult is much less appropriate. Learning to seek permission to speak might be fine behavior in the third grade, but waiting for permission to speak in a bargaining session, whether formal or informal, will ensure that you will never be heard. As an adult, raising one’s voice may not be as great a sin as stifling it.
By unfreezing your style options, you can adapt to the context and the other person and be more productive in conflicts.

 Summary

Conflict participants face the basic choice of avoiding or engaging in a conflict. This choice leads to the five individual styles of conflict management: avoiding, dominating, compromising, obliging, and integrating. An adapted Rahim assessment instrument was included to measure your and other’s conflict styles. Then, the specific advantages and disadvantages of each style were discussed. Looking at your conflict styles can be a good first step in learning how to manage your conflicts.
Caution is, however, in order when looking at styles. While it easy to assume your “style” can be precisely measured, they still are “self-report” biased by wanting to look good. Measures are also affected by culture, the relational context, and time of measurement (one point in time). The entire history with the other party is usually not factored in either. In reporting styles, avoidance is often underreported, the effects of interaction ignored, and we need to be cautious about assuming that some styles are “destructive” and others “constructive.” Finally, group studies are not able to give you precise suggestions about what to do in your own conflict situation.
We discussed extreme forms of reacting in a conflict—verbal aggression, bullying, and physical violence. These are more than “styles” of conflict. They are choices that damage others. Verbal aggression is placed as a subset of dominating. Causes for violence are discussed.
We discussed the interaction dynamics in some detail and concluded by noting that flexibility in style choice enhances your chance for productive conflict.
